Adding docs for native mint/burn gas token (#2995)
OffchainLabs/arbitrum-docs: docs/launch-arbitrum-chain/02-configure-your-chain/common/gas/configure-native-mint-burn-gas-token.mdx

- Call [`ArbOwner.setNativeTokenManagementFrom`](https://github.com/OffchainLabs/nitro-precompile-interfaces/blob/f49a4889b486fd804a7901203f5f663cfd1581c8/ArbOwner.sol#L38-L40) to activate with a future timestamp ≥ 7 days ahead. This is recommended for chains which are already live.
- Native-token owners list: only the bridge adapter contract(s) to minimize the attack surface.
- Outbox sweep bot: run once per hour to prevent stray collateral build-up.
- Adapter contract must implement replay‑protection and supply accounting as these requirements are out-of-scope for ArbOS.

## How to configure the feature for your chain

:::info

The native token mint/burn feature is currently not available for implementation at chain genesis. The ability to activate it during chain initialization will be part of a future release.

:::

### Enable the feature post-genesis

Below steps show the flow a RaaS / chain team can use to allowlist a bridge adapter. The example below uses a Foundry call, but you can also use other tools to interact with the precompiles directly.

> 1. Update your chain to ArbOS 51 Dia binaries and deploy the consensus-v51 WASM root.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Update your chain to [ArbOS 51 Dia](/run-arbitrum-node/arbos-releases/arbos51) binaries and deploy the consensus-v51 WASM root.
```

<ImageZoom
  src="/img/bridge-provider-mint-burn-diagram.png"
  alt="Bridge provider mint and burn"
  caption="A 3rd-party messaging layer triggers its Adapter to unlock to a specific address. The Adapter mints new tokens and distributes them to the user."
  className="img-600px"
/>

### Collateralization technique

**Guarantee collateralization of the native mint/burn contract**

The main risk of having two contracts responsible for native token issuance (the 3rd-party contract and the chain’s bridge) is collateralization imbalances. For example, you could end up with:

- 90% of tokens in the 3rd-party contract
- 10% of tokens in the Arbitrum Stack chain bridge

In which case, either could be under-collateralized for a withdrawal at any given time.

To resolve this problem, you may implement the options below:

1. **Collateral sweep:** Allow the parent-chain bridge contract to ‘sweep’ native gas tokens to a designated 3rd-party contract. Presumably, this is the contract that holds collateral for the chain (e.g., in LayerZero’s case, the parent chain's Adapter contract).

> 2. **Disable Arbitrum chain bridge withdrawals:** Disabling withdrawals on the Arbitrum stack chain, which ensures the 3rd-party token contract is the primary way to exit the chain (prevents an under-collateralized withdrawal on the bridge).

Reviewer: CC @asomani-ocl

> 2. **Disable Arbitrum chain bridge withdrawals:** Disabling withdrawals on the Arbitrum stack chain, which ensures the 3rd-party token contract is the primary way to exit the chain (prevents an under-collateralized withdrawal on the bridge).

Author: I have made changes to this. Its sort of a mix of 2 things - withdrawals get disabled automatically but the sweep will have to be setup. I made changes to the doc to represent this in a better way.

---
title: 'Use native interop token with mint/burn as your Arbitrum chain gas token'

> sidebar_label: 'Use native interop token with mint/burn as your Arbitrum chain gas token'

Reviewer 2: You'll need to shorten this sidebar_label: it doesn't fit in the sidebar

This "lock and mint" pattern is not compatible with an emerging category of "native interop tokens." These tokens rely on cross-chain messaging layers to facilitate a "burn and mint" approach to cross-chain bridging, meaning the representative asset is burned on the source chain and minted on the destination chain. Examples of tokens with this pattern include: LayerZero OFTs, the xERC-20 standard, or stablecoins such as Circle’s Native USDC (possible with Circle-supplied adapter).

[ArbOS 51 Dia](/run-arbitrum-node/arbos-releases/arbos51) introduces the ability for native-interop tokens to work seamlessly as the gas token of an Arbitrum chain. This feature allows a chain owner (`ArbOwner`) to manage:

1. Permissioning of onchain addresses (typically, a token adapter contract) that have mint and burn access to the chain's native gas token on the child chain.
2. A security switch to timelock changes to Native Mint and Burn permissioned addresses (mitigating the risk of misuse or attack).
3. A collateral-sweeping method to ensure the 3rd-party native interop token’s cross-chain adapter contract always remains properly collateralized.

:::important

> The Native Mint/Burn feature permits mint & burn capability of the rollup’s native gas token by a permissioned address on the rollup. It does not provide a solution for cross-chain interoperability and is not a replacement for 3rd-party omni-chain gas token products provided by partners such as LayerZero or Hyperlane. The table below helps to clarify the components needed to enable the use cases below.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The native mint/burn feature permits mint & burn capability of the Rollup’s native gas token by a permissioned address on the Rollup. It does not provide a solution for cross-chain interoperability and is not a replacement for 3rd-party omni-chain gas token products provided by partners such as LayerZero or Hyperlane. The table below helps to clarify the components needed to enable the use cases below.
```

- xERC-20 token as a gas token.
- Stablecoins (e.g. USDC) use mint/burn functionality for cross-chain interop.

### What this feature helps with:

- Launch a new Arbitrum chain with a native mint/burn gas token using a third-party birdge provider.
- Transition an existing native gas token from the canonical bridge (lock-and-mint) to a third-party bridge (e.g., LayerZero OFT) to enable "burn-and-mint" interoperability.

### What this feature does NOT help with:

- **Changing Gas Tokens:** This feature cannot be used to swap your chain's current gas token for a completely different token.
- **Multiple Gas Tokens:** You cannot add additional native mint/burn gas tokens to your Arbitrum chain; an Arbitrum chain only supports a single native gas token.

**_Notes:_**

- We **do not** recommend enabling Native Mint/Burn if your chain relies on the canonical bridge for liquidity or if you cannot comfortably implement the operational safeguards listed below.
- This feature is **bridge-agnostic**, so it’s possible to migrate from a bridge adapter implementation (e.g., LayerZero-OFT adapter) to another adapter without forking the chain or changing the gas token.

> - **Infra-level** benefit: unifies liquidity so Arbitrum Stack chain users see only one native gas token and avoid the previous “two bridge pools” condition (LayerZero integration still uses a lockbox/representation model, thus it does not remove wrapping globally).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Infra-level** benefit: unifies liquidity so Arbitrum stack chain users see only one native gas token and avoid the previous “two bridge pools” condition (LayerZero integration still uses a lockbox/representation model, thus it does not remove wrapping globally).
```

## Feature architecture

> There are three components make up the Native Mint/Burn feature:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are three components make up the Native mint/burn feature:
```

Below is a high-level data-flow diagram:

<ImageZoom
  src="/img/mint-burn-gas-token-hld.png"
  alt="Bridge provider mint and burn"
  className="img-600px"
/>

### Security TimeLock

As Native Mint/Burn introduces a security risk (an ArbOwner-level attacker can mint unlimited native gas), we have introduced a **speed bump/delay** feature that introduces a **hard-coded delay** for enabling Native Mint/Burn capabilities (for an already live chain).

Our hard-coded default for this period is **seven days**, commensurate with [existing L2BEAT advisories on time locks](https://medium.com/l2beat/introducing-stages-a-framework-to-evaluate-rollups-maturity-d290bb22befe). This period should give the chain owner time to respond to an attacker’s attempt to mint/burn the native gas token.

Details for the time lock switch are:

- A chain that has already initialized with Native Mint/Burn disabled must wait seven days for the precompiles to activate
- A chain can disable Native Mint/Burn instantly
- If a chain wants to have a lower delay (e.g., one day, one hour), they will need to maintain a small fork of Nitro that changes the hard-coded value:

>   - Hard-Coded value here: https://github.com/OffchainLabs/go-ethereum/blob/c289e79453d4fdd8644a88337885c8bf27155604/params/config_arbitrum.go#L49

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- A chain can disable native mint/burn instantly
- If a chain wants to have a lower delay (e.g., one day, one hour), they will need to maintain a small fork of Nitro that changes the hard-coded value:
  - Hard-Coded value here: https://github.com/OffchainLabs/go-ethereum/blob/c289e79453d4fdd8644a88337885c8bf27155604/params/config_arbitrum.go#L49
```

   - [`burnNativeToken(uint256 amount)`](https://github.com/OffchainLabs/nitro-precompile-interfaces/blob/f49a4889b486fd804a7901203f5f663cfd1581c8/ArbNativeTokenManager.sol#L36-L38): destroy native gas token as part of a withdrawal
2. Only addresses in the native-token owners list may call these methods. Chain owners manage that list through [`ArbOwner`](https://github.com/OffchainLabs/nitro-precompile-interfaces/blob/main/ArbOwner.sol):
   - [`addNativeTokenOwner(address)`](https://github.com/OffchainLabs/nitro-precompile-interfaces/blob/f49a4889b486fd804a7901203f5f663cfd1581c8/ArbOwner.sol#L44-L46)
   - [`removeNativeTokenOwner(address)`](https://github.com/OffchainLabs/nitro-precompile-interfaces/blob/f49a4889b486fd804a7901203f5f663cfd1581c8/ArbOwner.sol#L50-L52)

<ImageZoom
  src="/img/bridge-provider-mint-burn-diagram.png"
  alt="Bridge provider mint and burn"
  caption="A 3rd-party messaging layer triggers its Adapter to unlock to a specific address. The Adapter mints new tokens and distributes them to the user."
  className="img-600px"
/>

> ### Collateralization Technique

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Collateralization technique
```

> **Guarantee Collateralization of the Native Mint/Burn Contract**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Guarantee collateralization of the native mint/burn contract**
```

The main risk of having two contracts responsible for native token issuance (the 3rd-party contract and the chain’s bridge) is collateralization imbalances. For example, you could end up with:

- 90% of tokens in the 3rd-party contract
- 10% of tokens in the Arbitrum Stack chain bridge

In which case, either could be under-collateralized for a withdrawal at any given time.

> To resolve this problem, below can be implemented:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To resolve this problem, you may implement the options below:
```

1. **Collateral Sweep:** Allow the parent-chain bridge contract to ‘sweep’ native gas tokens to a designated 3rd-party contract. Presumably, this is the contract that holds collateral for the chain (e.g., in LayerZero’s case, the parent chain Adapter contract).

> 2. **Disable Arbitrum Chain Bridge Withdrawals:** Disabling withdrawals on the Arbitrum Stack chain, which ensures the 3rd-party token contract is the primary way to exit the chain (prevents an under-collateralized withdrawal on the bridge).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. **Collateral sweep:** Allow the parent-chain bridge contract to ‘sweep’ native gas tokens to a designated 3rd-party contract. Presumably, this is the contract that holds collateral for the chain (e.g., in LayerZero’s case, the parent chain's Adapter contract).
2. **Disable Arbitrum chain bridge withdrawals:** Disabling withdrawals on the Arbitrum stack chain, which ensures the 3rd-party token contract is the primary way to exit the chain (prevents an under-collateralized withdrawal on the bridge).
```

> The **Collateral Sweep** is implemented by adding an Outbox contract to the bridge that can permissionlessly send **only** native gas tokens locked on the parent chain bridge to a 3rd-party contract. This keeps all collateral in one place when mint/burn is enabled.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The **collateral sweep** is implemented by adding an outbox contract to the bridge that can permissionlessly send **only** native gas tokens locked on the parent chain bridge to a 3rd-party contract. This keeps all collateral in one place when mint/burn is enabled.
```

- [Outbox contracts](https://github.com/OffchainLabs/nitro-contracts/pull/339) are authorized to spend funds from the bridge. They can be registered using the admin function `setOutbox`.

  Typically, an Outbox contract requires verification of a proof for an authorized withdrawal to occur. A custom contract can be designed that permissionlessly sends native gas to a destination on the parent chain.

> **Disabling Withdrawals** is achievable by adapting the Nitro node to prevent non-zero value withdrawals. This approach still maintains our censorship-resistant properties, allowing the user to initiate a withdrawal from L1.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Disabling withdrawals** is achievable by adapting the Nitro node to prevent non-zero value withdrawals. This approach still maintains our censorship-resistant properties, allowing the user to initiate a withdrawal from L1.
```

| nitro-node       | [v3.9.3](https://github.com/OffchainLabs/nitro/releases/tag/v3.9.3) or higher (includes the fix for `ArbNativeTokenManager` precompile inclusion) |
| go-ethereum fork | Included in [ArbOS 51 Dia](/run-arbitrum-node/arbos-releases/arbos51) (please use the latest WASM module root, see below) or later                |

We suggest the following baseline or values for production chains:

- ArbOS version 51 or later. The latest WASM module root for ArbOS 51 Dia is `0x8a7513bf7bb3e3db04b0d982d0e973bcf57bf8b88aef7c6d03dba3a81a56a499`
- Call [`ArbOwner.setNativeTokenManagementFrom`](https://github.com/OffchainLabs/nitro-precompile-interfaces/blob/f49a4889b486fd804a7901203f5f663cfd1581c8/ArbOwner.sol#L38-L40) to activate with a future timestamp ≥ 7 days ahead. This is recommended for chains which are already live.
- Native-token owners list: only the bridge adapter contract(s) to minimize the attack surface.
- Outbox sweep bot: run once per hour to prevent stray collateral build-up.
- Adapter contract must implement replay‑protection and supply accounting as these requirements are out-of-scope for ArbOS.

## How to configure the feature for your chain

:::info

> The Native Token Mint/Burn feature is currently not available for implementation at chain genesis. The ability to activate it during chain initialization will be part of a future release.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The native token mint/burn feature is currently not available for implementation at chain genesis. The ability to activate it during chain initialization will be part of a future release.
```

   :::important
   The feature becomes live once the chain timestamp passes `NativeTokenManagementFromTime`. Until then, the `add/removeNativeTokenOwner` call will revert.
   :::
3. Deploy your bridge adapter (e.g., LayerZero OFT) and note the contract address.
4. Add the deployed bridge adapter as a native-token owner:
   ```bash
   cast send 0x0000000000000000000000000000000000000070 \
     "addNativeTokenOwner(address)" \
     {0xTheNewOwnerToBeAdded} \
     --private-key $PRIVATE_KEY \
     --rpc-url $RPC_URL
   ```
5. _(Optional)_ Deploy `ERC20MigrationOutbox` on L1 and run a bot to call `sweep()` on a desired cadence.
6. Chain owners should monitor the following events:
   - `OwnerActs(0xaeb3a464, address indexed owner, bytes data)` to see adding native owner
   - `OwnerActs(0x96a3751d, address indexed owner, bytes data)` to see removing native owner
   - `NativeTokenMinted` and `NativeTokenBurned` to see token mint and burn events

> ### Temporarily disabling the Mint/Burn feature

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Temporarily disabling the mint/burn feature
```

   ```

   `mintNativeToken` and `burnNativeToken` now revert because no authorized senders remain.

   Canonical bridge exits are now open, warm liquidity partners.

3. Verify the pause.

   ```bash
   cast call 0x000000000000000000000000000000000000006b \
     "getAllNativeTokenOwners()(address[])" \
     --rpc-url $RPC_URL
   ```

   The list should be empty

4. _(Optional but **recommended**)_ Notify downstream infrastructure: Bridges, indexers, and other relevant teams may need to be informed that canonical exits are open again and the adapter is offline.

**To re-enable the feature later**

- Add the adapter back (no delay if `NativeTokenManagementFromTime` is a past timestamp).

  ```bash
  cast send 0x0000000000000000000000000000000000000070 \
    "addNativeTokenOwner(address)" \
    {0xTheNewOwnerToBeAdded} \
    --private-key $PRIVATE_KEY \
    --rpc-url $RPC_URL
  ```

- You can call `GetNativeTokenManagementFrom` to verify `NativeTokenManagementFromTime` value:

  ```jsx

  cast send 0x000000000000000000000000000000000000006b \
    "getNativeTokenManagementFrom()(uint64)" \
    {0xTheNewOwnerToBeAdded} \
    --private-key $PRIVATE_KEY \
    --rpc-url $RPC_URL
  ```

> ### Disabling the Native Mint/Burn feature permanently

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Disabling the native mint/burn feature permanently
```

3. To verify behavior: `getAllNativeTokenOwners()` should return `[]` (empty list)
4. Canonical-bridge withdrawals resume automatically once the list of native-token owners is empty.

## Security checklist

| Risk                                 | Mitigation                                                                                          |
| ------------------------------------ | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Admin key compromise enables minting | Seven-day timelock, set up alerting on `NativeTokenManagementFromTime` updates                      |
| Buggy adapter over-mints tokens      | Remove owner would block mint/burn; users can burn & exit via canonical bridge after owners removed |
| Collateral split across two exits    | Canonical bridge auto-blocks withdrawals when owners exist; run Outbox sweep                        |

## FAQs

### Who should read this page?

- Bridge/infra engineers building an adapter that mints native gas.
- RaaS/chain operators who need to whitelist such an adapter and run the sweeper bot.

### Can I run the feature on an older ArbOS version?

> While Native Mint/Burn was technically introduced in ArbOS 41, we strongly recommend upgrading to [ArbOS 51 Dia](/run-arbitrum-node/arbos-releases/arbos51) for those enabling this feature.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While native mint/burn was technically introduced in ArbOS 41, we strongly recommend upgrading to [ArbOS 51 Dia](/run-arbitrum-node/arbos-releases/arbos51) for those enabling this feature.
```
